---
title: "Arsenic removal from drinking water by chemical methods (In Turkish)"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2010-itudergisi-e
excerpt: 'In this review paper, chemical methods for the removal of arsenic from drinking water was discussed.'
date: 2010-05-26
venue: 'ITU Dergisi/E'
paperurl: 'http://itudergi.itu.edu.tr/index.php/itudergisi_e/article/view/746'
citation: 'Alpaslan, M.N; Dölgen, D.; Boyacooğlu, H.; Sarptaş, H. (2010): "Arsenic removal from drinking water by chemical methods", <i>İTÜDERGİSİ/e</i>, 20, (1).'
---

Abstract
======

Arsenic  in  natural  waters  is  a  worldwide  problem.  Weathering  of  arsenic  rich  minerals  and  volcanic  activities  are  natural  sources  releasing  arsenic  to  the environment. Apart from the natural phenomena, anthropogenic  (man-made)  inputs  are  also  respon-sible from the arsenic contamination. Effluents from metallurgical  industry,  glassware  and  ceramic  in-dustries, dye and pesticide manufacturing industries, petroleum  refining,  leather  processing,  and  other  organic  and  inorganic  chemical  industries  are  ma-jor  anthropogenic  sources  of  arsenic.  Furthermore  agricultural  uses  of  pesticides,  herbicides,  insecti-cides,  defoliants,  and  soil  sterilants  which  include  arsenic and arsenic compounds increase the arsenic content  in  water  resources.  Arsenic  is  a  fairly  com-mon  environmental  contaminant.  Both  groundwater  and  surface  water  sources  of  drinking  water  can  contain  arsenic.  The  levels  of  arsenic  are  typically  higher  in  groundwater  sources.  Arsenic  levels  in  groundwater tend to vary geographically. The  major  routes  are  through  inhalation,  skin  ab-sorption .and ingestion. Ingestion is the predominant form of exposure among others. High doses of arse-nic can cause acute toxic effects including gastroin-testinal  symptoms  (poor  appetite,  vomiting,  diar-rhea,  etc.),  disturbance  of  cardiovascular  and  nerv-ous  systems  functions  (e.g.  muscle  cramps,  heart  complains)  or  death.  Because  of  the  proven  and  widespread  negative  health  effects  on  humans,  in  1993,  the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  low-ered  the  health-based  provisional  guideline  for  ar-senic concentration in drinking water from 50 to 10 μg/L.  The  United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency (USEPA) subsequently revised the maximum contaminant  level  (MCL)  as  10  μg/L  in  2001.  New  standards have been adopted as a national standard by  most  countries,  including  Japan,  Jordan,  Laos,  Mongolia,  Namibia,  Syria  and  the  USA,  and  the  European  Union  (EU).  However,  many  countries  have retained the earlier WHO guideline of 50 μg/L as  their  standard  or  as  an  interim  target  including  Bangladesh,  India,  Bahrain,  China,  Egypt,  Indone-sia,  Philippines,  Saudi  Arabia,  Sri  Lanka,  Vietnam,  etc..   Since   implementation   of   the   new   guideline   value of 10 μg/L requires certain investments, those countries  need  additional  time  and  support  to  har-monize  their  national  standards  with  new  regula-tions. Turkey is a country facing and struggling with those emerging  arsenic  problems.  Stringent  standards  of  drinking  water  were  promulgated  by  Ministry  of  Health  (MoH)  in  2005,  and  arsenic  level  was  low-ered from 50 μg/L to 10 μg/L. The new standard has been  enforced  since  February  2008.  After  this  limi-tation  a  number  of  wells  which  have  been  (planned  being) used for potable water supply are considered as    “arsenic-contaminated”.    Besides    prolonged    drought  induced  by  climate  change  caused  release  of  arsenic  from  aquifer  sediments  and  this  resulted  in  elevated  concentrations  in  groundwater  sources.  This fact triggered problems stemming from arsenic in  water  in  some  areas.  Particularly,  western  parts  of   central   Anatolia   (e.g.   Kutahya,   Emet,   Simav,   Usak)  have  high  risk  due  to  their  geological  forma-tions  and  geothermal  inputs  which  pose  suitable  conditions  for  arsenic  contamination  of  water  re-sources. Inventory study results carried out by Gen-eral  Directorate  of  Mineral  Research  and  Explora-tion  (MTA)  showed  elevated  arsenic  concentrations  in  the  Kutahya-Emet-Hisarcik  and  Nevsehir  Basins  (20-200 μg/L).  There  are  several  treatment  technologies  that  are  available  for  arsenic  removal  from  drinking  water.  The  most  commonly  used  technologies  include  oxi-dation, co-precipitation and adsorption onto coagu-lated  flocs,  lime  treatment,  adsorption  onto  sorptive  media,   ion   exchange   resin   and   membrane   tech-niques. Selection of an appropriate method is a quite complex decision and affected from a number of fac-tors (e.g. arsenic compound, raw water quality, tar-get  arsenic  concentration,  existing  water  treatment  plant,   land   availability,   operational   and   mainte-nance  costs,  etc.).  In  the  presented  paper,  chemical  treatment  methods  used  in  arsenic  removal  (i.e.  chemical  oxidation,  conventional  coagulation  and  filtration,  coagulation  assisted  microfiltration,  oxi-dation filtration and lime-soda method etc.) are eva-luated   considering   treatment   performance,   costs,   operational  features.  In  Turkey,  generally  chemical  processes and filtration have been used in many wa-ter treatment plants. Existing water treatment plants can  be  modified  for  arsenic  removal.  In  this  frame-work,  involvement  of  pre-oxidation  stage,  optimiza-tion  of  the  coagulant  type  and  dose,  modification  of  conventional  filters  (utilization  of  adsorbent  based  filter  materials),  utilization  of  adsorption,  ion  ex-change,   membrane   filtration   processes   for   post-treatment purpose are recommended.

[Download paper here](http://itudergi.itu.edu.tr/index.php/itudergisi_e/article/view/746)

Recommended citation: Alpaslan, M.N; Dölgen, D.; Boyacooğlu, H.; Sarptaş, H. (2010): "Arsenic removal from drinking water by chemical methods", İTÜDERGİSİ/e, 20, (1).


